So first things first, can you tell me what are your names, you already have said, where
you were born but then where your parents were also then born? And if you start there,
so your names, where you were born and then actually where were your parents born?
Well, we're sisters. My name's Naheed Ashraf. I'm Asra Syed. We were both born in a hospital
called Lydia Bainan by the Celtic manner, which doesn't exist anymore. So born in a
court. Our parents were from the original India, which then partitioned in 1947. And
we are from Pakistan, so there was a lot of movement around where mum and dad were actually
Dad was originally from a place called Jumshir and then moved to Bihari and then mum was
from a place called Jherawala near Feslabad in Pakistan.
What do you know of these areas your parents were born?
I visited quite a few times and had a look at the land that we used to own and where
my father used to work on the land. We have a family, our extended family is out there,
our uncles and cousins and have been out there a number of times on both sides of the family,
my father's side and my mother's side.
So when people came from India during the, after the partition, most of them, majority,
99% settled as landowners. So everyone owned a piece of land and they had to fend for themselves
from that land and that's how it worked. So mum and dad weren't related as such,
they sort of only through marriage they became related. They weren't sort of cousins or
anything like that that you sometimes find. So yeah, my nanny and my nanna and everybody
they've all sort of brought up. Their mum came from a very, very large family. They
were nine brothers and sisters and they all came over, they were very lucky actually as
they came over as a family and that included my dad's family as well where during the
partition a lot of people lost a lot of family members due to what happened but they were
the lucky ones.
With the partition our mum tells us that a lot of people of the family, the elderly,
died on the way as they were partitioning into Pakistan and are buried somewhere in
Pakistan but their graves were never marked so we will never know en route from India
to Pakistan where our ancestors are buried en route when they were making their way into
Pakistan which is really sad. But we know that the land that they had in Pakistan they
grew corn, sugarcane and wheat and then they grew vegetables and the vegetables were used
then for cooking for food for the family.
Do you know about the social life back there? What games they played, what activities culturally?
Do you have any details on that?
Well I think with dad it was mainly being thrown into work from a very, very young age
and I think that happened with a lot of the men. Women on the other hand used to make
up their own games. Mum tells us quite often as a little girl when they were very young
her and her friends would get together and they would make dolls and get them married
but they would actually carry out the whole wedding ceremony, make rice and make all the
food and they would actually have a wedding for the two dolls and those sort of things
or play Ludo. Ludo was a very popular game then so it wasn't like sort of, there were
no phones or nothing then or you know Xbox or anything like that so it was you had to
make up things yourself. So yeah and we found that a lot of the men went to school but a
lot of the girls didn't go to school. They went to Islamic classes to learn the Quran
but they didn't all get taught in schools which was quite sad not as it is now.
Let's explore that then a little bit. So that's my next question about schooling.
Do you know what kind of education they had?
The education system is very different to what we have here. So it was more like if
you got to a certain level in school, so they had one, two, three, four, five, if you got
to sort of like the fifth Jama'at, that was amazing, you know, you could go on to do big
things. So you know as long as you sort of got the basics of everything, that was, you
know, you were good to go. But it was, you can imagine coming over from another country
settling somewhere else, teachers had to be found, schools had to be set up, it was a
big thing.
They had no belongings because when they came from, when it partitions because there were
riots between both religions at that time, that they described, my mum describes her
siblings being thrown into the water with a view of them rescuing them from the water
to reunite. And then they came with basically what they were wearing, you know, they had
no belongings. So their main focus was to find land, farm, look after the family and
find a way to survive, to eat.
Yeah, but they also, I remember mum and dad telling me that because they had sisters,
mum had sisters, you know, and because they were girls, they would travel through the
night rather than the day so they wouldn't get kidnapped and raped and stuff like that.
So they had to travel through the night, sort of like, you know, through the grasslands
and everything, very, very quietly. And that's how they came across, otherwise they would
be captured and, you know, killed and things. And that happened to many, many families.
I mean, let's bring that back to yourself then. What was life like for you growing up
here in Newport and your schooling? You talked about your parents, that is not what you're
old.
Yeah, we were the first generation, yeah, first generation Muslims to start schooling.
So I remember right from the primary age, I think there was only one other person in
the class that was of any colour. And you were very alien to people and I think teachers
had quite low expectations of you. Even though you were born in this country, you spoke English,
many without an accent, you were still seen as somehow inferior. I always felt that it's
almost like your colour disqualified you from being British.
Yeah, you had to work really hard to get accepted and even then you weren't really accepted.
So through school I didn't really experience any racism as such, but you still get the
comments, the odd comments and, you know...
People would say racist slurred and saying, but not you.
But not you, yeah.
Because you're not like that, because they would be in the gang of friends that you had
made. But they would still then say it to other people, it's not like you, that you're
different. Well, no, I'm not. I'm the same. They'd question you about your food as well,
wouldn't they?
Yeah, definitely all the time.
What do you eat and the way you dress? It was a struggle and I think, you know, very
much like when parents came over, they didn't have the welcome that was promised. It wasn't
the land of milk and honey that was promised to them. And I think that it's not far
from that today when you look at education opportunities, when you look at how far people
have come. It's almost like you have to be, you have to act white to be able to progress.
And that was exactly what they had to do to try and integrate into the community. And
it's been very challenging, I would say.
Yeah, it's been challenging, yeah.
What family traditions or celebrations do you remember from a young age that your parents
kind of did with you, by you and for you? And so how, I mean, when did they arrive
in the UK as well?
So, you know, Mum arrived in the 19...
We've got a whole section on that, but we can just get context.
Yeah, so Mum came over around 1967. Her dad came and told us.
Dad was here for five years, so he came in the 60s when they were asking for the labour
force to come over here. And then Mum arrived, then he went back to Pakistan after five years
and then married my Mum. And then they came over here.
And how long until you guys were born?
I was born the year after.
Okay, that's a good time to start then. Back to that question, when they arrived, you guys
started to appear. What traditions start do you remember from a very young age then? And
cultural practices that were instilled upon you and around you?
Yeah.
More as you remember?
Well, obviously the obvious ones like Eid and everything. Well, that was a big thing.
Massive family get-togethers, because by then my uncles and aunts had arrived. My uncles
had got married and, you know, so they were older than Mum, so they had already started
their families. So they were slightly older than us. I think between our cousins, there's
about ten years before we started to be a ring. But they settled in Scotland, not here,
so we didn't see them very often. It wasn't until they came over a few years later than
Serpentine Cardiff, which is when we started big family gatherings. But it was mainly sort
of the Muslim sort of traditions, I would say.
Yeah, so obviously we'd been brought up in a culture where we were toying with two cultures.
So when we were in school, we'd remember coming home and saying, it's Christmas in
school, and then having to say to, you know, parents sort of trying to explain that that
festival was a Christian festival and what have you. But Dad was really keen for us to
mix with different cultures and different religions and learn about each other. He really,
really wanted to integrate into Britain. And Eid was lovely, especially, you know, the
Ramadan was lovely, you know, the abundance of food, you know, we didn't really understand
it. You know, trying to fit into this society. My mum used to make us keep half a fast. She
used to say we could eat at 12 o'clock. And so we used to keep a fast and then wake up
and then eat at 12 o'clock and then think that we did something really amazing. It's
only until we grew up we realised that Mum was trying to sort of keep our religion intact
and keep our cultures intact. And every weekend we had people in our house. Our house was
always full of people. So our parents progressed, you know, after working really hard, we ended
up having businesses. And when we had businesses, our networks became even more bigger and bigger.
And all I can remember is our house being full of people, us being in the kitchen just
making teas and samosas. But it was lovely. Everybody had time for one another.
But I do remember though, because we had a lot of English families in our streets, at
Christmas, Mum and Dad would make a sort of like, give them presents, maybe just chocolates
or something. They would always make an effort to go and give their families a gift at Christmas,
even though it wasn't anything to do with us. So we felt sort of all together because
we had lovely neighbours in that street and they were very, very helpful. They weren't
sort of, you know, if Mum and Dad weren't home they would say, you know, come to our
house after school, have some tea and then we'll drop you back off and things like that.
They were very, very sort of, it was a lovely little community we lived in. It was really
nice in those days. But it wasn't always like that. So when we were very, very little
we had some neighbours who were very racist and they would throw things into our garden.
They would put the music on really loud. And, you know, Mum and Dad kind of felt like if
they'd said something then it would only be worse. So they tolerated it for a while.
And then after a while then whatever they threw over was being thrown back. Eventually,
luckily for us they moved and a good family moved in. But Dad was always protective of
us as well. I mean those social occasions we would always drive up to Rochdale where
we had family and spend, you know, holidays would be there. They wouldn't be holidays
abroad or they would be going to Pakistan. We wouldn't have the holidays abroad as such
as we do now. But it did make you think back when Dad started working here on the railways
when he first came after he, when he was working in the factories first he went on to work
in the railways and they gave him an English name. Yeah. And that always has stuck in my
mind. Like he has a name which you can say quite perfectly why. Or you could have shortened
his name. You could have shortened his name. So his name was Ashraf, Mohammed Ashraf and
they gave him an English name on the railways as Sam. So he was always known as Sam. Everyone
knew him as Sam and that's what they called him. And I always quite often thought like
why, why did they have the need to do that? And I would, you know, quite often I'd always
thought even now it really bothers me. I always think I want to go back to all the people
who were working with him and ask them, you know, why, why did you do that? But in our
generation, I know people even in our generation today that have English names at work because
they're trying to fit in. What would, do you know what was the reasoning for them to
arrive when you came? What was the motivations and reasoning? It came for work. It came to
help rebuild Britain. They came because, well my dad used to say, obviously I'm here
because they were there, but one day they will tell us to go back. Yeah, he did always
use to say that. And he always used to say we have to build something there. One day
they will always tell us to go back because, you know, they just want us to do the work
that the white people don't want to do. So he came to help rebuild Britain after the
war. Yeah, they suffered quite a lot with us growing up and the fact that, you know,
most, half of, more than half of their earnings were sent back to help with the families back
there so they could build something there. So there was always something there to go
back to. And I think that was, we don't think like that now, but in that generation I think
most parents did that, built something back home in the fear that they might say, well,
you know, you can go now. You know, because of what they experienced in India, I think
it was always there that that might happen again. So when dad was earning, mum had to
cope with, you know, those shillings that my dad was bringing home. Part of that had
to be put away so they could send back. And so even mum started work then. So she started
working from home as a lot of the women did, where you're used to sew clothes at home.
So there'd be factories like for dresses or hospital wear or whatever. And they would
come and give you a bundle as they called them then. And it depended on you how many
bundles you wanted that week. You'd sew them, maybe put in zips and buttons and whatever
on them. And then they would pay you, pay mum for that. And that happened a lot with
all the, just so they were earning something to help, you know, help bring the children
up and help with bills and things. I remember it being quite...
But dad was earning £12 a week, you know. And they were renting a room when they first
came here. And then mum wanted to have her own house. So they saved and saved and saved
and then bought a house. So it was £1,100 that they paid for the first house. But in
those days, the community would get together. So if you were going to buy a house, all the
community would put their savings into your deposit to get the house and help you get
on their housing ladder. And then when it came to their turn, you would do the same
for them. And that's how it worked. And that's why a lot of the families ended up with homes,
not just renting. And that's how it worked then.
So...
What do you know about the work situation? You said where he worked, where your father
and your mother worked, you can briefly explain that. What do you know about those working
situations and do you have any stories to tell them that?
Well, dad was quite lucky because he got to grips with the language quite quickly. And
because of that, he made a few friends along the way. And because he just got on with things,
although my dad was quite vocal, he still just got on with things. To him it was a job.
He was earning money to provide for his family. He sort of got promoted quite quickly.
Yeah, so he was with the railway industry and it was the shunt in the coal. So it was
basically the coal, the trunks that came along with the coal in them, making sure that they
were going to the right place. We didn't have to go into the coal mines because he was part
of the railways. And that was in Barry, Barryport there. That's how it started. That's where
he used to work. So when an opening came in Newport, they offered it to my dad, which
was great, with a pay rise. So it sort of fell into place.
They were long hours.
Oh yeah, very long hours.
Really long hours. And do you remember, dad used to say, when he first came here, before
he married mum, there were lots of Pakistani men living in the same room even. And they
used to take it in turns to cook. And it's almost like, because they worked shifts, there
was never a bed empty. So the ones who would go in the daytime would give the night men
the bed. And the bed was never empty because they would just kind of swap.
And food was very scarce as well. So one of them would have to make the flour for the
roti. The other one would make the curry. And they didn't have fridges in those days,
so they had to cover it up and hide it somewhere cool. And then it was portioned for each
of them. So whoever came home took their portion and that was it. That's all you had for the
day. You know, it was very, very tough times. They were really tough times. I remember dad
saying, and sometimes you would go sort of hungry, you know. But yeah, like you said,
they used to have to share beds. So one would do a day shift, one would do a night, and
they would swap with each other. And that's how they made it work. So until my granddad
said, you need to come home and get married, you need a wife.
But then when they saved their money, he ended up buying, we ended up owning, going
into the rag trade. So it was fashion in Kingsway Centre. And it was in the 80s and business
was thriving. We had a really, really good business. It made mum then gave up work of
what she was doing. All the efforts were put into the shop. And in those days, the whole
family would be there. So children used to even go into the shops then to be part of,
you don't see that these days, but be part of the people that serve the weekends on a
Saturday or after school. And life changed when dad had his own business. Because that
was what was going to make him enough money to be able to support his family here and
to support the family there in a good way.
I mean during those times, what did they speak of back home? What was their connection
back home and how often did they go back and do they make any efforts to sound like they
were at that point focusing a lot of energies here?
Well the form of communication was telegrams first. So that's how they communicated. You'd
send something and it wouldn't get there until about six to eight weeks later. And
the same from them. Unless somebody was travelling, then they would give them a letter and say
can you give this to my son or my daughter? And you were from the same village. But if
not, then that's how they communicated through telegram. There was quite often somebody had
been born or somebody had passed away and you wouldn't find out until about two months
later because of the telegram. So that was very, very hard. And I know my dad really
missed his mum and dad.
That's the first time I ever saw dad cry is when we had the telegram that his mum had
died. The first and probably last time that I ever saw him.
Yeah.
That was heartbreaking. That was really hard.
But he was lucky enough to bring them over here and take them to Hatch as well. So when
he had the opportunity and the funds, he did call my grandparents here and they stayed
a while. So I think that was something he felt like such a big achievement there, didn't
he? That he was managed to get them here and then take them to Mecca.
Sometimes they used to go together and it was a bit more difficult for us with being
in school and whatever. And sometimes they would take it in turns to go. So they always
kept that connection with Pakistan.
Yeah. So every few years. It wouldn't be every year. For every few years one of them
or both would go.
What did they speak of as their early experiences in the UK?
Cold. Wet. Food was different. They felt isolated. That's why you find within our communities
why they're all so together. So you go down the street and it's mainly Asian because
in those days you couldn't fit anywhere else where you were supposed to go.
Everybody became everyone's support network from your own communities which is why they
all tried to live together.
To keep near each other, yeah. So they always had that there.
And you didn't have a car. So anything you wanted to go to get, like Mum would have to
take us all with her to go to the Saturday market, get all the fruits and the veg or
any groceries that they needed and then she'd walk there and walk back again because she
didn't have any other form of transport then. So that was difficult. She said it was really,
really hard whether it was snowing or we used to have a lot of snow and we used to have
a lot of rain but in those days we had to have really heavy snow. And she said she still
had to go out so she'd sometimes leave us at home. Don't move, you're in one room.
That sort of thing because in those days it wasn't as strict as it is now. And she would
have to quickly go early in the morning, get her shop and get back again to us and you
know, with a heart all over the place thinking that she's left us, you know. And it was
really, really difficult times. You couldn't get halal food. So I remember one day my dad
bringing home some chickens. They were live chickens running around the room and he took
them out to halal them just so we could have chicken. And so, you know, it's not like it
was then. But even then it wasn't like you'd get halal restaurants and stuff. Even going
out was really hard, wasn't it? You couldn't sit somewhere and eat. There was nowhere for
you to go. So you were restricted in a lot of ways in integrating. There was no mosque.
So my father was one of the founders of the Jamiah Mosque in Commercial Road in Newport
and helped build obviously the foundations of the structure. So just before he died he
managed to get the structure ready there. And it was like that for years afterwards
then because obviously the committee had disbanded at that time after that. And so people who
are from Newport remember a metal structure of foundations, steel structure still being
there for years and years and years until it's now built into the rest of the mosque.
But yeah, he was very, he was really active in that, wasn't he? He was a businessman
and he used that to his advantage in the sense of creating that cohesion. He was involved
in so many things. He was involved in magistrates, home safety committees. He introduced halal
food to our health boards in Newport. He was on so many different committees and all sorts
because he really believed that despite what colour, race, religion you were, whatever
your background was, everybody should be living in harmony. He really believed that
that's what we could do and that's what we could achieve if we just all tolerated
each other's religions.
Customs and traditions. As you guys have gone older, what customs and traditions have you
retained that your family has offered you at a young age?
We still, the children in the family have been brought up in the same way. They still
go to mosque when they're small, you know, to learn about the religion. We still have,
we still do Ramadan, we still do our Eids. So we've kept united as a family in terms
of the extended family. My brothers still live with my mum and their families so they
still live in an extended family because they are our support networks, you know, having
that so...
Why? Why have you preserved these particular traditions and customs? Why are they meaningful
to you?
I think mainly because mum was left on her own, she was quite young. We don't. She was
quite young. So we felt very protective of her. My brothers felt very protective of her.
So there will come a time when obviously as their families grow things will change and
mum or none of us have a problem with that. But at the moment, we all feel mum needs to
be surrounded by that. She's done so much for us and it's our only way to give back.
We see mum all the time, my brothers live there. So she's always, always looked after
and I think it just became a priority within the family. Yeah, you know.
As well I think is to maintain our sense of identity as well because I, for example, never
used to wear... I've been to Uomra twice and you know, on and off I wore a scarf but I
never really did at work because I felt like I should be trying to fit in. And one day
I thought, no, I've lost my identity trying to fit in with this society. I'm not going
to do that anymore. And I started wearing a scarf to work and was very surprised by
that reaction from a lot of people. People were almost not able to speak to me even until
I had to say my brain hasn't changed because I have a scarf on my head. And I found that
quite eye opening because when I wasn't wearing it, I think people felt that I was more like
them and now I am wearing it. I look different. So I think maintaining your identity in terms
of culture and in terms of religion is quite... is very important. I mean religion is always
played a really big factor in our house, particularly, you know, we read regularly, you know, we
have get togethers where we read the Quran just as a family, you know, for my dad. We
maintain as much religion and we keep on learning. And you know, the internet is a great thing
for the kids these days to learn more but we were taught the Quran when we were here,
when we were young. We were just taught how to read it so we can read Arabic from the
Quran but we can't understand it. So we don't know what we're reading but we're reading
it. And so, you know, it's a bit different now. There's more knowledge out there of transliteration
and stuff. And the way the world is changing so fast, it's so fast paced at the moment,
I think it's really important for the next generation, the youngsters now, to keep that
family unit for them to understand. So when they're all together, that culture is still
there. I think the minute you start sort of expanding and going your own way, I think
they start to change. So they have their limits. They know what's right and what's
wrong. But I think it's really important for them to understand where they came from
and where they need, which route they need to take. I think there was always a fear from
all people that came from Pakistan that the children that grew up here would become too
westernised and would lose their way, would lose their religion, lose their values. You
know, people here, they dress differently. You know, that even going to the cinema was
such a big thing when we were young. You know, it was, you know, why would you want to go
to a cinema, you know, when you can watch things at home? And it was that fear, I think,
that, you know, they might lose their way. You know, how do we hold on to that religion
and that culture? But I found over time that there's been a dip and there's been a peak,
isn't there? Because all of a sudden everybody is moving towards Islamic religion in a real
big way and finding out more about it, learning more about it. Learning that Islam actually
means peace, you know, and learning how to live in a more tolerated society. Whereas,
you know, there was a time, was it, when everything was just trying to find your way, wasn't it?
Well, even if we wanted to go to a restaurant, mum would say, well, why can't you cook at home?
Yeah. Don't you need to pay to go to eat? I don't understand.
What traditions or cultural practices have you possibly even adapted or updated, do you
feel, as being another generation? Because I think that tends to happen a bit and you
just make, you know, you have cottage pie for iftar or something like that.
Yeah, exactly. Well, obviously, yeah.
I've been chilling in my lasagne. I think the food definitely has because they're
young and it's good for them because they can't just, they need to fit into society
and be able to socialise in a confident way. But can you remember as, when we were younger,
that dad used to love foods from different countries, so he'd come home and we used
to have on a Sunday, on a Saturday, we used to have like javals, rice, all the traditional
curries and everything. And on a Sunday would be roast dinner. And we would have a roast
dinner in the same way, with no spices. It was just like a proper chicken roast with
all the vegetables and everything. And a friend who are Pakistani used to say, they're having
English dinner in their house because they saw that as an English dinner that, and I
used to say, it's the same food, it's just cooked in a different way. And they just couldn't
understand. And even to this day, and you know, this generation's on now, when we're
talking about what you're cooking today, in our house, they still say, oh, we're making
English dinner because it's in their heads. Sometimes we used to call it that. But the
menu as such has changed because the kids want to eat differently. So, you know, there's
pastas and Italian and pizzas and, you know, you name it, food has totally changed.
But clothing, the way we dress has changed as well because when we were younger, it was
always seen as you would wear, you know, clothes that were traditional, even if you were out,
you know, you would wear the traditional dress. And my father was a little bit more liberal,
as long as we were covered, you know, he didn't mind sort of, you know, what their tops and
trousers looked like. And, you know, you know, we even had people from the community, didn't
we, ringing home and saying, I saw your daughter.
Dresses on the top, jeans on the top, where's she going?
And, you know, my parents would say, well, she went from home like that.
So she's going to come home like that.
And then we had people that used to actually go into the house and then change their clothes,
just to fit in, just to fit in in society, and then re-change to come home, you know,
just so they didn't miss, they feel like they were missing out on something.
So this generation are very lucky because everything is so much more liberal with them, you know.
We were brought up with the attitude, look, you've got to save, save, save because you have to
save your money to make sure that you have a better life for yourself.
You know, you need to buy your own houses. You need to, you know, make sure that you have enough
to live on, you know, don't live off the state, work hard.
You know, we had a really strong work ethic.
But that's because of the struggles that they had faced, that they'd come through.
Obviously they were always going to, you know.
I find that's different with the children that are born now.
I find that everything that people didn't have is given to them on a plate.
So, you know.
There's definitely a change, definitely a change, you know.
They want to go out all the time, they want to eat out all the time, you know.
I remember.
Buy iced coffees and things, it's a daily thing, it's not like a treat anymore.
For us when we were growing up, that would be something you were saved for,
and then you'd have a treat.
But now it's like, oh, I'm just going for a coffee or I'm just going out and go for lunch.
You know, it's totally different, isn't it?
And it was different in terms of the housework and everything because we didn't have microwaves,
we didn't have washing machines.
I remember mum washing by hand and I remember mum using towels for nappies,
the traditional nappies and having to wash them and hang them on the...
I think everybody used them, they didn't have disposable ones then.
And now it's so easy.
And yeah, I can remember dad having the first colour television and thinking, oh wow,
and it was all those like lines on there, that one was sitting there like...
And dad was the first person in the community to have a car.
Yeah, in our street.
It was such a massive thing.
So he had a brown Humber.
Humber sector.
Yeah, Humber sector.
Have you got any heirlooms or mementos or ornaments that remind you of your parents' upbringing?
So I have got...
So back in the day when my mum got married, traditionally they still do it now,
but they used to give a big chest and in that chest there would be plates and rugs and crochet,
hand crochets, you know, pillowcases and things like that.
So from my mum's chest I have her...
What they gave her was...
It's called a lota, but basically it's what they use to clean themselves in the bathroom.
So when people use jugs and things these days, so it's a bit like a bidet,
but it looks...
I don't know how to describe it, but it looks like a measuring jug with a little...
Spent.
Spent on it basically.
But it's quite intricate because obviously it was given to her when she got married,
so obviously they're kind of engraved, you know, it's quite posh, one of you like.
So it's never been used, it's just, you know, so I've got that.
And I've also got a little from my granddad when he came for the first time.
They didn't have what's called a hookah, which is what they use in...
Like a smoking pipe.
Like a smoking pipe, which they use in shisha bars these days.
So he made one, like a little bottle and a top and wrapped it up and whatever,
and it's got a little spout and everything.
So I have that as well.
And I don't have any air rooms, but I do have some of dad's clothes still, like his suits.
My dad was very suet and booted, he was a very smart man.
And so I still have one of his suits, and it still smells of my dad.
So, I've just got like a mum's, you know, surma that they put in the eyes, the line of the coal.
Used to keep it in like sort of like silver little trinket pots then.
So I've got that.
I've kept that for many, many, many, many years, so I've got that.
And I think, don't you still have the first grand shif that was given to you by mum?
Do you still have that?
I still have my grand.
Yeah, so it is a little bit worn, but it's like, like, decades and decades.
I read my grand when I was six, so I've had it since I was six years old.
Yeah, and that was passed on, it was one of those that's been passed on.
Well, the reason I ask is, in the monks' people's collection, we can digitise air rooms if you want them to be.
So photographs can be scanned and restored, tapes can be restored.
If you have ornaments, they can be photographed if you want those to exist in another format.
So that's up to you when that moment comes.
I've got a case of dad's cassettes, but I don't know what's on them because I haven't got a cassette player.
They're kind of just people's collections.
But there's things in there, there's probably, there's a cassette somewhere with dad's voice in it and I don't know where it is.
So at this point, I mean, I've got one last question, but that's going to be about Agent Live.
I think this is over to you now.
If there's things you've not mentioned that you definitely want to get on file, now's the chance to speak them.
So you went through a chronological order of, you know, originally India to Pakistan to migrating to arriving to working.
And then customs and traditions that you can maintain.
Is there things that you feel you want to add at this point?
And if you want me to ask a question to trigger it and say, yeah, yeah.
Well, you probably don't need to know this, because this is just a little bit of the history that, you know, one of the things I probably would have liked to mention that
Dad left his whole life behind, his family and everybody.
And, you know, but this wasn't the first time that Pakistan had helped Britain, because in World War I,
like 400,000 Indians came over here to fight in the war.
And many Pakistanis and Indians died alongside British troops in that war.
And I think that's often forgotten that this wasn't the first time Pakistan came to the aid.
It was India then. So the people from the Indian subcontinent at that time came over here.
So I think sometimes people forget that this is like a history of people coming here to help Britain.
It wasn't just, you know, the August 1947 partition.
I'll ask that as a question. So, I mean, from your perspective, based loosely on what you just said,
what scales do people need to be aware of how integration and migration has benefited the country?
How do you want to display that really? You can talk about that if you want to.
We can read it out, it's up to you.
Okay. Because you're an editor anyway, aren't you? So I just, I just, so.
I mean, I've already said the part where dad was very perceptive and told us stories about Britain and its experience.
He used to say, we are here because they were there. And one day they will tell us we don't belong.
And at that time we thought he was being humorous because my father was a really, really funny man.
But, you know, unfortunately, some of those things ring true for us today.
And the partition in India saw the end of a 200 year British rule.
But I'm not sure if people know, but the British Pakistani community is one of the oldest and the largest ethnic minority community outside of Pakistan.
Here, the UK's open door immigration policy, they allowed members of the Commonwealth to apply here.
But that was for Britain's post-war labor needs, being promised the land of milk and honey, leaving everything behind.
But pre-partition, everyone lived in India and there was 400,000 Indian soldiers fought for Britain in World War I.
Many Pakistanis and Indians fought and died alongside British troops.
So Great Britain coming here was not so great.
The reception for the Pakistanis was far from welcoming.
And I worry about that today because we see people coming into the country today and even today certain communities are welcomed more than others.
Particularly in the recent Ukrainian crisis, for example.
That wasn't like the Afghan crisis where we had actually gone from Britain and interfered in people's lives.
This was something else that had happened.
But the welcome the Ukrainians received here, the support they received, the ability to work,
it was very different from asylum seekers and refugees that come from other countries.
But it was a far cry from Pakistani society where they lived in tight family units.
Generations resided together and there was a fundamental support network.
It wasn't easy for first generation immigrants and racism was widespread.
They didn't look the same. The color of our skin, our language, religion and culture became a problem for many.
My father realized the color of his skin somehow disqualified him from being British.
And he couldn't understand that.
He'd come from an Islamic religion which instructs Muslims to wholeheartedly help the needy, the destitute, without considering color, creed, race or religion.
The weather here was cold and the food was unfamiliar and appetizing and not in accordance with cultural and religious requirements.
In the mid-60s, discrimination of skin color became illegal.
But on the other hand, there was an increasing concern over rising immigration.
The government imposed a series of immigration acts which effectively ended migration into Britain from the Indians of the continent, but that included the Caribbean as well.
So the black and South Asian people that came here did feel that they were under attack.
So the country that they voluntarily had come here and they were asked to come and rebuild turned their back on them.
That affected hundreds and thousands of immigrants.
But they settled here, they filled manual jobs and steel mill jobs and textile industry jobs.
And for that, like we said, it was the railways.
He was only 18 when he came here.
We've spoken about sort of him, the way he lived in one house and how he used to share the beds and how determined he was really to make a good life of himself.
I bet him buying his house.
So he co-founded the Gwent Community Relations Council.
So in 1984, he co-founded the Gwent Community Relations Council.
That was in Newport.
And he became an executive member.
And he was representative on the Home Safety Committee, with local authorities, with the police magistrates.
And obviously all the work that he did with the Jonya Mosque and the Halal Food and Goodness that he introduced in the health board,
which with dietary requirements that help you to recover better.
There was nothing people just sometimes wouldn't eat until they go to hospital.
There was nothing for them to eat, apart from mashed potato.
So that was a real turning point.
But he was a modest man, and many of his contributions were done silently.
So he helped a lot of people in the community.
It was only after his death that people would say, he helped bury my daughter, he helped me buy a car when my car wasn't, you know, he gave me money when I was struggling.
He helped so many people to the extent that when he died, some of his friends refused to ever travel the road he lived in again because he just wasn't there.
There were thousands and thousands of people at his funeral.
They had to close the streets.
And the funeral processions took place here in Dewsbury in London, and right across Pakistan as well.
So he's remembered by both young and old as an inspirational, happy and kind family man who always helped, mentored and guided so many people.
He was always there, never missed a funeral or a wedding.
He was always there at funerals, he always helped bury every person that died.
He never, ever missed it and treated everyone as his own.
Nothing was too much trouble.
And even to this day, both young and old, will say he was my friend.
And it's only last week I was at a funeral.
And quite a young person actually said, you know, he was my friend.
And even to this day, he's been 29 years on the 20th of August.
And even to this day, people still remember my father.
When I think about my upbringing and what I love, I think of all that despite all the struggles and the racism experienced, we were brought up in a loving family.
Advocates for togetherness and peace.
We were taught to respect and be inspired by all religions and cultures and create bonds.
I always remember the overabundance of food and being surrounded by lots of people.
And I think of the values of my faith and how my parents taught me those and taught me how to be honest, to love, be kind and generous.
They're the values that our parents passed on to us.
Due to all his hard work and sacrifices and my mother's.
My dad said, we are here because they were there and one day they will tell us we don't belong.
Your children, dad, will say we are here, dad, because you were here and we will continue your legacy to help us belong.
Thank you very much.
I mean, my next question is just going to be about Age Alive.
How did you get involved with Age Alive?
This is a funny story. You can tell the story.
Well, for a number of years, pre-COVID, we kept saying that we wanted to join something.
And all the groups seemed to be older and, you know, or they weren't sort of like because we both work, they just weren't suitable for the date times and dates of work and whatever.
So we kept saying to each other, it'd be really nice to do something, a hobby of something, let's do something together.
Anyway, so one of my friends said, why don't you join a group called Coffee and Laughs?
So we sort of said, oh, shall we sort of say, should we go along and just see what it's about?
So let's go and have a little chit chat with them and just see if we fit in or if it's something we want to do or don't want to do.
They were looking for donations and you had found loads for, they've got a group there called Baeby Bundles.
And you had lots of like denny's and baby bottles.
Yeah, I'd gone somewhere and they had these things on offer and I bought them and thought, well, I need to donate them now.
Where do I donate them? And then I got in touch with Ingrid Wilson and she said, well, we run a Baeby Bundle.
Why don't you come along and bring them on the same day with you? And that's how it started.
So we went there and we just took to it. They took to us and we took to them.
It was really, it's really funny because a lot of them are older than us, even though everybody's over 50, I think now.
And it was like, I kept saying, I can't think of anything worse.
You know, that was my original. But when we actually got there, it was quite amazing.
Yeah, they took to us and straight away it was just like, oh, yeah, they really were so welcoming.
And we thought, that's OK. This might be something that we want to do.
And then a few weeks later, we walked in and they were having a reshuffle within the group
because some of the sort of founders of it now want to pass things down, pass some responsibilities down.
So I walked in and they said, oh, there she is. And I said, oh, what have I done?
And they said, oh, you're going to be the new chair of Coffee and Laughs.
And I said, am I? And they all said, yeah, before you walked in, we all voted you in.
So it's got to be you. So I'm now the chair of Coffee and Laughs and have been for quite a while now.
So that's how we got involved in that group.
And that came alongside Age Alive because that's another group in Newport,
which most of the members of Age Alive are part of Coffee and Laughs as well.
So that's how we got involved with both of the groups.
And we've done many things with Age Alive and we've invited to.
We've sent some Windrush songs with them.
Yeah. So that's how that came about.
What do you feel is the importance of projects like Age Alive and Coffee and Laughs?
It's just the coming together of people who would not necessarily have anything else to do.
It sort of takes away that loneliness.
A lot of the ladies there have lost partners.
They're not in family groups.
They are on their own. They're all from different backgrounds.
So it just brings them together and gives them a bit of a light to look towards things.
They've got events to look forward to.
They know they have to get up and get dressed and look nice and go out and meet other people.
It gives them that sort of life again, where they've just been stuck at home doing nothing,
especially during Covid. That was awful.
So this is like their little getaway, which they wouldn't necessarily do or know how to do.
I think it teaches them as well a greater awareness.
It gives them more skills.
It gives them opportunities to try new activities that they perhaps hadn't grown up with trying.
I can't imagine what it would be like if someone said,
do you want to learn a bit of flower arrangement?
They would just do things you just didn't do.
It's like anything. If you don't try, you don't know if you enjoy it.
I think this is a way of them not only trying new things,
but having those skills and maybe then carrying that on if it's something that they enjoy doing.
And with these kinds of groups, unfortunately, I've seen lots of groups over many years set up and fall.
The reason for that is because of the funding. People just don't have the funding to carry on with groups.
It gets people learning about each other's cultures.
It's about the confidence as well.
You see some of them who were very, very quiet in the beginning when I first started.
They're so confident now. They're vocal. They'll say what they want to say.
They get involved in so much more.
We organize different sessions for them, whether it's yoga, whether it's making something,
whether it's all to do with health and well-being.
They're not shy to talk about their problems in front of other people.
They enjoy that, don't they, to get other people's take on what they might be going through.
They don't feel like they're the only ones that are going through something.
There are others like them, and that's a big thing for them.
It's been a massive contribution to helping towards people's mental health and well-being.
Absolutely.
But we can only go to the groups. We don't come to Age of Life every week.
We both work. We're both professionals. We both work.
Everything that we do voluntarily, we do in between.
We volunteer with lots of different things.
We volunteer. We do a lot of work in the mosques right across the Gwent, really.
We've been involved in setting up, looking at new mosques in areas where there aren't mosques,
open days for women, and lots of things.
So we get involved in things, but we do it.
They're extra voluntary activities outside our normal everyday work.
Is there anything else you would like to add on record?
I've done my questions.
Do you want to know what we do for a living, or does it really probably not matter?
You can do.
I just thought that's what our parents did. I don't know.
It's a normal history project. I think modern day, current history is not the day.
Maybe in about 10, 15 years you can come back and do it.
Or if I'm still here.
Next age, you can talk about where you've gone to.
I think we've got plenty there. That was exactly an hour.
Was it really?
One minute under an hour.
We didn't know what to want until we kind of guessed.
We were in the cast again. I'm not really sure what this is about.
I said to her, not sure, and I said, funny enough, I typed something.